So far in this module,
you've learned how to use
the linear Kalman filter
for state estimation and you
also saw that the Kalman
filter is the best
linear unbiased estimator or blue.
However, the linear Kalman filter
cannot be used directly
to estimate states that
are nonlinear functions of either
the measurements or the control inputs.
For example, the pose of the car includes
its orientation which is
not a linear quantity,
orientations in 3D live
on a sphere, in fact.
So, we need to look for something else.
In this video, we'll be learning about
one important and widely
used variation of
a Kalman filter called
the Extended Kalman Filter or EKF.
The EKF is designed to work with
nonlinear systems and it's often
considered one of the workhorses
of state estimation because it's used in
all sorts of applications
including self-driving cars.
By the end of the video,
you'll be able to
describe how the EKF uses
first-order linearization to turn
a nonlinear problem into a linear one,
understand the role of Jacobian matrices
in the EKF and how to compute them,
and apply the EKF to
a simple nonlinear tracking problem.
The filter works by first predicting
the mean and co-variance of
the updated state estimate at
some time step k based on
the previous state and any inputs
we give to the system,
such as the position of
the accelerator pedal.
The filter then uses a
measurement model to
predict what measurements
should arrive based on
the state estimate and compares
these predictions with
the measurements that actually
arrive from our sensors.
The Kalman gain tells us how to weight
all of these pieces of information,
so that we can optimally combine
them into a corrected estimate,
that is, a new state and
an updated co-variance.
This is sometimes called a
predictor-corrector architecture.
As we saw in the last video,
the Kalman filter is actually the best
of all possible estimators
for linear systems.
Unfortunately, there is a catch.
Linear systems don't exist in reality.
Even a very simple system like
a resistor with a voltage
applied isn't truly linear,
at least not all the time.
For a certain range of voltages,
the current is a linear function of
the voltage and follows Ohm's Law.
But as the voltage gets higher,
the resistor heats up which alters
the resistance in a nonlinear way.
Since the systems that we encounter
in practice are nonlinear,
this raises an important question.
Can we still use the Kalman filter
for nonlinear systems?
If so, how?
The key concept in
the Extended Kalman Filter
is the idea of linearizing
a nonlinear system.
For this reason, the EKF is sometimes
referred to as the
Linearized Kalman filter.
Linearizing a system just means
picking some operating point a and
finding a linear approximation to
the nonlinear function in
the neighborhood of a.
In two dimensions, this means
finding the tangent line to
the function f of x when x equals a.
Mathematically, we do this by taking
the Taylor series expansion
of the function.
Thinking back to your calculus courses,
you may remember that
the Taylor series expansion is a way of
representing a function
as an infinite possibly,
some whose terms are calculated
from the function's derivatives
at a single point.
For linearization, we're
only interested in
the first order terms of the Taylor
series expansion highlighted in red.
Let's return to
our general nonlinear motion
and measurement models and
try to linearize them.
What should we choose as the operating
point for our Taylor's expansion?
Ideally, we would like to linearize
the models about the true value of
the state but we can't do that
because we already knew
the true value of the state,
we wouldn't need to estimate it.
So instead, let's pick
the next best thing,
the most recent estimate of the state.
For our emotion model,
we'll linearize about
the posterior estimate
of the previous state and
for the measurement model,
we'll linearize about our prediction of
the current state based
on the motion model.
So, now we have a linear system in
state space and the matrices F,
L, H and M are called Jacobian
matrices of the system.
Computing these matrices correctly is
the most important and difficult step
in the Extended Kalman filter algorithm,
and it's also the most common
place to make mistakes.
But what are these
Jacobian matrix exactly?
In vector calculus, a Jacobian
or Jacobian matrix is
the matrix of all
first-order partial derivatives
of a vector valued function.
Each column of the Jacobian
contains the derivatives of
the function outputs with
respect to a given input.
For example, if your function takes
a three-dimensional vector and
spits out a two-dimensional vector,
the Jacobian would be
a two by three matrix.
Intuitively, the Jacobian matrix
tells you how fast each output of
your function is changing
along each input dimension,
just like how the derivative
of a scalar function tells
you how fast the output is
changing as you vary the input.
The Jacobian is really
just a generalization
of the first derivative
to multiple dimensions.
Here's a simple example
of the Jacobian of
a two-dimensional function
with two inputs.
The Jacobian matrix captures
the first derivatives of each of
the two output variables with respect
to each of the two input variables.
The best way to get comfortable with
driving Jacobian is just practice.
Try deriving the Jacobian of
this vector valued function.
Now, we know how to compute the
Jacobian matrices needed for the EKF,
and all that's left is to plug them
into our standard Kalman
filter equations.
There are a couple of
differences to notice in
the EKF equations compared to
the Kalman filter equations
we saw in module two.
First, in the prediction
and correction steps,
we're still using the nonlinear models
to propagate the mean of
the state estimate and to compute
the measurement residual or innovation.
That's because we
linearized our motion model
about the previous state estimate,
and we linearized the measurement model
about the predicted state.
By definition,
the linearized model exactly
coincides with the nonlinear model
at the operating points.
The second difference
is the appearance of
the L and M Jacobians related to
the process and measurement noise.
In many cases, both of these matrices
will be identity since
noise is often assumed to be additive
but this is not always the case.
So far, this has all been very abstract.
So, let's walk through a concrete
example of actually using the EKF.
We'll use the same example from
module two but with a twist.
We're going to track the position and
velocity of a car moving along a rail.
But now, instead of receiving
periodic GPS measurements
that tell us our position,
we're going to use
an on-board sensor like a camera
to measure the altitude of distant
landmarks relative to the horizon.
We'll keep the same linear motion model
as in the original example,
and assume we know both the height of
the landmark and its position
in a global reference frame.
Because our sensor is measuring an angle,
our measurement model has
a nonlinear dependence on
the position of the car.
We're going to need to linearize
the measurement model and use it
in our Extended Kalman Filter.
The Jacobians for
this problem look like this.
Notice that the F matrix
in this problem is
exactly the same as the F matrix
in the original problem.
That's because our motion model
is already linear in the state.
Also notice that
the noise Jacobians, L and M,
are both identity since
both the emotion and the measurement
model have additive noise.
Try using the data given here
to estimate the position of
the vehicle at time one using the EKF.
Here is the result of the prediction step
for the mean and
co-variance of the state.
Notice that the result is identical to
the linear Kalman filter case because
the motion model actually is linear.
For the correction step,
this is what you should get.
Keep in mind that you should use
the nonlinear measurement model to
compute the measurement residual,
not the linearized model.
Also note that in this case,
even though the corrected mean at
the state estimate is different
from the predicted mean,
the corrected co-variance didn't change
that much from the predicted co-variance.
This is because the Azimuth angle
changes slowly at this distance
and doesn't provide
much information about
the vehicle state compared
to a GPS measurement.
So, to recap, we saw that
the Extended Kalman Filter or EKF
uses linearization to adopt
the Kalman filter to nonlinear systems.
We'll encounter several
different nonlinear systems
to which we can apply
the EKF or its cousin,
the UKF, in the upcoming course project.
Linearization works by computing
a local linear approximation to
a nonlinear function using
a first-order Taylor series expansion
about an operating point.
This requires several Jacobian matrices
which contain the set of
first-order partial derivatives.
In the next video,
we'll discuss an
alternative formulation of
the EKF called the error
state Extended Kalman Filter.
This would be a useful tool later
in the course when we talk about
estimating the vehicle
orientation in 3D space.